[Music]
we have the Duke and Duchess of Sussex
arriving first of many royal arrivals a
couple who have very close links with
the Commonwealth in fact earlier today
were at Canada house marking
Commonwealth day there with hundreds of
young Canadians and the Duke of course
it's not only the patron of the youth
ambassador for the Commonwealth but is
president of the Queen's Commonwealth
trust only last week the Duchess herself
was appointed as vice president of the
Queen's Commonwealth trust between them
needs to really have dedicated a lot of
time to a range of Commonwealth issues
and will now be introduced to players in
today's service and as they move along
the receiving line they will meet
Reverend James Sinclair their venerable
David Stanton
it's all bomb on the receiver general
nooks about to be introduced to the
prime minister tourism a who's here in
her capacity as chair in office and not
as a British prime minister who ever
happened to hold the last Commonwealth
summit is called the chair and office
it's a bit like being holding the
presidency of the EU for example and
Britain will hold that role until the
next Commonwealth summit in Rwanda and
of course the real reminder that
whatever noise is off there are it's the
business of the Commonwealth goes on
indeed and tourism a was of course hosts
along with the queen of last year's a
great summit which brought all the
Commonwealth leaders to London and and
at the time spoke of the importance as
Baroness Scotland of course the
Secretary General talking to the Duchess
it is a reminder on a day like today
just over the road at Westminster who
knows what's going on but here there is
a an air of calm and air of permanence
and an air of friendship and and the
Commonwealth the Commonwealth Games are
always called the friendly games and
Commonwealth summits do have this unique
atmosphere do have a sense of family
gathering and that's why it's smiles all
round and reminds us all there is a
wider of world yes times that could be
very reassuring and you can Duchess and
I having completed the introductions
they will now wait for
the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and
the younger members of the royal family
clearly picking up the Queen's
enthusiasm and following her example
quarries Association the Queen is a firm
believer that the future and that the
strength and the future of the
Commonwealth rests in its youth as it's
been pointed out already 60% of the
Commonwealth's 2.4 billion people are
under the age of 30 youth is all if it
doesn't appeal to young people then it
really doesn't have a future the Queen
gets that and that's why she's so keen
to pass the baton to bring the younger
generation on to get young members of
the family like Harry and Megan and
indeed like the Duke and Duchess of
Cambridge indeed we see them arriving
now and they've together carried out
overseas visits on behalf of the Queen
to Commonwealth countries including
Canada Australia New Zealand it was the
New Zealand actually was the very first
country which the Duke there long before
his marriage he went on his first
overseas of official visit on his own
clearly enjoying the saiga day is mildly
distracted touches him yes he he's
travelled widely throughout the
Commonwealth he was in Africa just last
year in fact on a wide range of
conservation projects the Duke and
Duchess have taken their children on
Commonwealth shows taking them to
Australia and to New Zealand earlier
this year for example the the Duke was
addressing the World Economic Forum in
Davos where he shared a platform with
the New Zealand Prime Minister descender
Arden and just next month for example he
and his brother will be up at the crack
of dawn on Anzac Day April the 25th to
honor all those Australian and New
Zealand soldiers I think that's a good
moment to reflect of course
in the Great War three million men from
Africa from Asia took part on the Allied
side it's very important to remember
that on a day like today the oldest
Commonwealth organization of them all as
the Commonwealth War Graves Commission
if there's one thing really that does
unite the Commonwealth above all else
its shared sacrifice and shared endeavor
and those who paid the ultimate
sacrifice and all Commonwealth nations
are equal when it comes to the
commonwealth war graves and their
magnificent work in over 120 countries
and known a day like today it is
important that we remember that too
we're in the the month of the
anniversary of the beginning of the
great battles of Kojima and involved
were men from the Indian Army this an
extraordinary multinational coalition
which stood at the gates of India and
repelled a Japanese invasion I think
it's so important we do remember events
like that later this year of course
we'll be marking the 75th anniversary of
d-day as well another great Commonwealth
undertaking and now it's time for the
Prince of Wales and the Duchess of
Cornwall to arrive at he of course is
the next
of the company he absolutely Fogell he
as the Commonwealth nations unanimously
agreed last year there was really no
debate about it all they all very
enthusiastic about it that the future
head of the Commonwealth at the request
of the Queen should be the Prince of
Wales and there really is more on the
exception of the Queen who understands
this organization as well as she does
his travel so widely he has he's he's
been to over 40 of the 53 nations and
he's grown up with it he represented the
Queen in 2013 at the Commonwealth summit
in Sri Lanka Armada a memorable speech
in which he discussed his childhood
growing up around these legendary
figures such as Joseph Mary of Tanzania
dominant off with malls are all these
people he'd grown up he knew them he
understands how the Commonwealth works
because he's grown up with it and the
Duchess of Cornwall there she's been to
over 20 countries in our Commonwealth
countries with the Prince and was
recently appointed a vice patron of the
Royal Commonwealth Society she takes a
great interest in child literacy and
runs the Commonwealth essay prize the
environment is very central of
preoccupation of the Prince of Wales as
well and of course for the Commonwealth
a big theme this year that's right as so
many of the princes core interests ready
overlap with those of the Commonwealth
if you look at whether it's the
environment whether it's
regeneration sustainability the role of
young people and society these are these
are core issues that the prince and the
Duchess there are very keen on and which
the Commonwealth are very keen on so
they are a natural fit what do you think
will be the challenges of his age of the
coming age of the Commonwealth
I think the courts always learned that
it has to rather like the monarchy it's
got to evolve it's got to adapt he
doesn't have hard fast
constitutional rules and that in a way
is one of its strengths it can move it
can adapt so that perhaps in one decade
it finds itself dealing with big human
rights issues or dealing with something
like a pardo but now it can move on and
focus on for example the environment
there's a principle I was talking to his
younger son they're all waiting
obviously for the Queen
but it is an organization that that can
have a very broad range of issues at any
one time and I think the fact that you
do have big g8 countries talking as
equals to very small island states it
does give you a different perspective on
what matters in the world and it's worth
remembering that this year's the 70th
anniversary of the Commonwealth next
year is the 70th anniversary of the
United Nations and the creation sorry
the 75th anniversary of United Nations
and the creation of its Charter and that
was born out of a meeting of
Commonwealth leaders by striking today I
mean it is still obviously there's a
very respectful sphere here but it's
it's lighter in tone shall we say it is
more celebratory that's right it does
have an atmosphere unlike any other
regular event here at the Abbey it's
it's not entirely secular but it's
certainly I think it's safe to say it's
the least overtly Christian ceremony
that takes place here at the Abbey
because it is designed to appeal to
those of all faiths and none
obviously it's happening here in a
one of our most ancient and most famous
churches but it's still designed to
reach agile
we have of course more than 800 school
children and young people of the service
this year 76 school and youth groups
many of them here will be extremely
excited of course to see the road there
waiting a few rows off with to catch a
glimpse they're very sturdy lot as well
I noticed that a lot of them are just
there in their shirts I mean we are
sitting here I could say it's the
warmest day we are well wrapped off
there's a small Raptor but there are
some there are some tough young members
of the congregation there near the door
there's quite a draft plane but they
they're waiting as far we all as are
those trumpeters from the
[Music]
here is how I'll just do the Queen
drums going still as her majesty
[Music]
throughout her reign of course the
Commonwealth has been head of the
Commonwealth and the sovereign of 15
Commonwealth realms in addition to the
United Kingdom that's right she is
actually the head of state of more of
the Earth's surface than anyone else by
dint of being queen of not just this
country but Australia Canada and many
others and no one has attended this
service more often than a Majesty
herself
no one will be as familiar with what is
about to happen yet she the smile on her
face she never tired of this of course
we have her to thank for the fact that
it is such a diverse aunt multi-faith
ceremony that's right and if this event
actually began in a in a church the
Church of the martyr in the fields in
the 1960s 1966 and it was quite
controversial at the time a number of
members of the Church of England didn't
like this multi-faith aspect and
complained about it and for the number
of years it was held at the Guildhall in
the City of London but it was the Queen
herself who said I really don't want
this to be a secular when I wanted to be
held in a place of worship it should be
multi-faith but it should be held in a
place of worship and Westminster Abbey
is known as a royal peculiar the queen
is in charge of it and she said I think
we'll have it there and it's been here
ever since
[Music]
[Applause]
the Commonwealth flag bear is a Sandra
masacre she's from Zambia and is
currently studying for a master's degree
at the University of Bradford
[Music]
the clean will now lead the procession
into the main body of the abbey in
preparation for the start of today's
service
the Commonwealth mace bearer is
panayotis crashes from Cyprus this mace
was a gift of the for the royal
anniversary close to the Queen in her
role as head of the Commonwealth and the
40th anniversary of her accession to the
throne
[Music]
on behalf of the Dean and chapter I
welcome you warmly to westminster abbey
for our annual celebration of the
commonwealth this year we think of a
connected Commonwealth in which our
precious environment given and blessed
by Almighty God may be cherished and
nurtured as we give thanks for our
connections across the world
let us pray that we may dwell together
in peace and that our mutual friendship
and support may be for us all a source
of strength first in the words of Jesus
let us pray for the coming of God's
kingdom our Father who art in heaven
hallowed be thy name thy kingdom come
thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven give us this day
and forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive those who trespass against us
and lead us not into temptation but
deliver us from evil for thine is the
kingdom the power and the war for ever
and ever
and now the music of the Dahl Foundation
during the performance the twelve
drummers will make their way from the
nave through to the eastern end of the
alley
[Music]
and now we'll have a performance from
the award-winning group clean bandit
[Music]
I've been here ten days before all I
heard was silence a Rhapsody for you and
me and every melody is timeless
[Music]
now I can't find a key without you and
now your son
so if you want that room I just wanna be
punished
[Music]
I'm sorry if this article
but every day
[Music]
I was running
I'm never gonna find
cuz I'm in here it's Anthony
[Music]
a rancid
to your heartbeat and when you
[Music]
I just wanna be
clean bandit are now a reflection from
un patron of the oceans Lewis Pugh I'm
standing at the North Pole on the edge
of the ice in front of me is a large
open patch of sea and the winds is
bone-chilling
I start stripping off my thermal gear
until I'm down to just my speedo trunks
and what I remember most about that
moment was that feeling of dread inside
my stomach and then I hear the countdown
3 2 1
and as David my coach got to one a
thoughts came into my mind and I just
couldn't dive in the thought was if
things go horribly wrong now how long
would it take for my frozen body to sink
the four and a half kilometers all the
way to the bottom of the Arctic Ocean
which is probably not the best thought
to have and so I turned to David and I
said if I get into trouble please don't
let me swim the full kilometres appalled
me out after 500 metres he grabbed me
and said Lewis what are you doing if you
dive into this water
preparing to swim a kilometre but also
thinking about the possibility of
getting out of the half way you are
preparing your mind for victory and
defeat at the same time he said to me
you have seen the Arctic melt now is the
time to carry your message there is
nothing more powerful than a made up
mind and so we stood on the edge of the
ice I said a short prayer and I dived
straight into the Arctic Ocean ladies
and gentlemen when it comes to
protecting the environments we have been
diving in with thoughts of victory and
defeat in our minds at the same time
I've been swimming now for 32 years and
over that period of time
I've seen our oceans changed completely
three things have come together to
create this perfect storm
climate change overfishing and plastic
pollution and the speed of the change is
alarming when I first swam in the Arctic
the water was 3 degrees centigrade when
I learned there recently it was 10
degrees centigrade and that is right on
the edge of the Arctic ice pack what we
are now doing to our world will impact
every single person on this planet it
will impact every future generation and
it will impact the whole of the animal
kingdom and let's also remember when we
damage our environments we can also
create conflicts people fight over
dwindling resources so when we protect
our environments we foster peace and
therefore it is right that on the 70th
anniversary of the Commonwealth we ask
ourselves the question what can we do
together to restore the health of our
oceans and to build peace well I believe
that Commonwealth is uniquely placed to
solve this crisis almost every
Commonwealth nation is a maritime nation
many of us our island nations we have a
deep affinity with our oceans and we
also represent one-third of the world's
population but the Commonwealth is so
much more than the sum of its people we
are also home to some of the most
incredible life on Earth the
Commonwealth is a home of the polar bear
the Commonwealth is a home of the
African penguin the Commonwealth is a
home of the humpback whale the bluefin
tuna and the Great Barrier Reef our
Commonwealth is ocean with our vast
marine estate we now have an opportunity
to work together and to lead the world
in ocean
that is why it was so important at last
year's Commonwealth summit that we
acknowledged with the blue charter our
responsibility to protect our oceans but
we must now take action and keep up with
the speed of change scientists are
urging us to fully protect at least 30%
of our oceans by 2030 currently we have
protected less than 7% the young people
with us here today did not cause this
crisis and yet it will completely shape
their lives it's our responsibility to
hear their voices and act upon it so now
is a time to build a new generation of
marine protected areas and now is also
the time to welcome in a new generation
of marine protectors I'd like to leave
you with one final thought it's the
moments which challenge us the most that
define us we stand at a crucial moment
in the history of our planets so we must
dive in together and without reservation
in order to protect our oceans let this
be the Commonwealth's gift to the world
next the choir will sing John Rutter's
for the beauty of the earth
[Music]
[Applause]
the body does not consist of one member
but of many if the foot were to say
because I am NOT a hand I do not belong
to the body that would not make it any
less a part of the body and if the ear
were to say because I am NOT an eye I do
not belong to the body that would not
make it any less a part of the body if
the whole body were an eye where would
the hearing be if the whole body were
hearing where would the sense of smell
be but as it is God arranged the members
in the body each one of them as he chose
if all were a single member where would
the body be as it is there are many
members yet one body the eye cannot say
to the hand I have no need of you nor
again the head to the feet I have no
need of you on the contrary the members
of the body that seemed to be weaker are
indispensable and those members of the
body that we think less honorable we
clothe with greater honor and are less
respectable members are treated with
greater respect
whereas our more respectable members do
not need this but God has so arranged
the body giving the greater honor to the
inferior member that there may be no
dissension within the body but the
members may have the same care for one
another if one member suffers all suffer
together with it if one member is
honored all rejoice together with it
Prime Minister Theresa May reading as
chair in office of the Commonwealth
the Australian musician William Barton
will now play a self composed piece
Kalka dong goos journey
[Music]
Wow
William Barton and now the tenor alfie
Boe will sing an acapella performance of
Snow Patrol's run I'll sing it one last
time for you and we really have to go
you've been do nothing that's right
in all I've done and I can barely look
at you but every single time I tune I
know we'll make it anywhere away from
here
line up line up as if you have a choice
even if you cannot hear
my voice I'll be right beside you dear
[Music]
louder louder and we run for our lives
I can hardly speak understand how you
can raise your voice to say to think I
might not see those eyes makes it so
hard not to cry but as we say our long
goodbyes
I nearly to light up light up as if you
have a choice even if you cannot hear my
voice I'll be right beside you dear
[Music]
I can hardly speak I understand how you
can raise your voice to say
light up light up as if you had four
toes even if you cannot hear my voice
I'll be right beside you dear
[Music]
and now the congregation will sing dear
Lord and father of mankind
[Music]
[Applause]
we are told in an ancient Jewish story
that when God created the first human
God took him and led him round all the
trees of the garden of eden and said to
him look at my works how beautiful they
are and all that I have created it was
for you pay attention that you do not
corrupt and destroy my world for there
is no one to repair it after you let us
pray for a renewed commitment to work
together to appreciate our connectedness
and through it to repair the damage we
have done that there may be a future of
Shalom which means wholeness for the
planet and for us all
compassionate Lauder
we turn to you beseeching you through
your mercy which encompasses all of
creation your light which revives all
hearts and your love which provides hope
make firm our unity as we stand together
embracing our differences amend our
shortcomings so that we may be steadfast
and what is to come
o sustainer we thank you for this
beautiful world for the land and sea for
the gift of its resources so make us
responsible stewards and instruments of
healing that we may be examples of your
benevolence
from the Lord's Play all living
creatures came and from the divine light
all creation sprang why should we then
divide human creatures into the high and
the low the Lord the maker has molded
one mass of clay into vessels of diverse
shapes free from taint are all the
vessels of clay since free from taint is
the divine Potter
father of all nations whose authority is
gentle and whose mercy is without
boundaries grant us your peace and your
wisdom as members of one body may we
learn from your son the value of mutual
love and respect may this Commonwealth
of Nations be united in a spirit of
understanding and trust with the deep
awareness of the intrinsic worth of each
member in your sight we ask this through
the same Christ our Lord amen
the next anthem has been a die City
omnia opera
[Music]
[Applause]
let us now stand to pledge ourselves
afresh to uphold and serve the values
and fellowship of the Commonwealth we
affirm that every person possesses
unique Worth and dignity we affirm our
respect for nature and that we will be
stewards of the earth by caring for
every part of it and for it as a whole
we affirm our belief in justice for
everyone and peace between peoples and
nations joining together in kinship
affinity diversity and unity as members
of a worldwide family of Nations we
acknowledge our shared inheritances and
celebrate the goodwill and mutual
respect which inspire us to work with
one another for the good of all through
the networks and opportunities offered
by Commonwealth Connection we affirm our
belief in the Commonwealth as a force
for good in the
and pledge ourselves with service
Secretary General of the Commonwealth
the b-positive choir featuring Loreen
Kato will now sing rise up
walking down and title of living alive
on a merry-go-round you can find the
fighter by seating you so we're gonna
walk it out
[Music]
Mountains gonna walk it out
Mountains when the silent isn't quiet it
seems like it's getting hard to breathe
I know you feel like dying but I promise
we'll take the world to his feet
[Music]
[Applause]
again
[Music]
b-positive and now for the final hymn
leaders Heavenly Father lead us
[Music]
god grant to the living grace to the
departed rest to the church the Queen
the Commonwealth and all mankind
peace and Concord and to our sinners
life everlasting the blessing of God
Almighty the Father the Son and the Holy
Spirit be among you and remain with you
always
[Music]
and that marks the end of the service as
we see the choir and members of the
clergy process towards the Great West
door
[Music]
and Robert Hartman that was a very
eclectic ceremony very warm certainly
very warmth Fergal and in Charlie in
keeping with the traditions of this
entirely multi-faith multinational
service that really does reflect the
span of all aspects of the Commonwealth
and that flag with the Sun always rising
it's a it's an optimistic symbol and
neither Queen will lead the procession
out of the Abbey but it is a reminder
that that we are recognizing nation's
large and small and an organization that
over 70 years has already made an
extraordinary impact on the world we saw
today along with the you know the great
traditions of the Abbey but a very
contemporary message particularly around
the question of climate change and that
contribution from the Lewis Pugh yes
climate changes become very much one of
the central aspects of Commonwealth
discussion also that the whole idea of
connectivity which the Queen raised in
her commonwealth Day message today if we
talked about how connectivity is she
said you know we hope to find new ways
of expressing traction the value of
belonging in a connected Commonwealth
connected in so many different ways but
yes environment is one of them and youth
is another and there's the Prince of
Wales who this very weekend will be
embarking on a a major tour of the
common Martha's this connection it
continues in a couple of days as the
beautiful Sussex he'll be presenting
Commonwealth Youth
so as the royal family make their way
through the abbey the days still we get
to go on the view of the Prince of Wales
tonight will be a poem whathe quarters
Opera House greeting hundreds of guests
there to continue the celebrations of
today so it's a it is a very varied
occasion
well Her Majesty feel on this 70th
anniversary that the Commonwealth is in
safe hands that it has a strong future
yes I think particularly after last
year's summit she held at Buckingham
Palace which was such a warm and such
United event this is an organization
that can often have very profound
rancorous arguments but last year was a
very harmonious event and I think she
feels it's in very strong hands let's
not forget when she became Queen when
she walked into this Abbey for her
coronation
she had the emblems of the coronation
woven into her garden there were just
eight nations and today there are 53 and
that is quite a remarkable achievement
the fact that it's still going strong
it's still here
I think for the head of the Commonwealth
as she makes her way past the grave of
the Unknown Warrior this for her on its
70th birthday I think I think this is a
significant and heartening moment and
we're here now I vow to thee my country
favorite for all him
[Music]
majesty speaking there with the reverend
mark birch minor canidates a christened
the reverend Christopher stalls central
figure in many of the ceremonies here at
Westminster Abbey
[Music]
escorting the Queen there is the Dean of
Westminster John Hall this will be his
last Commonwealth service it's decided
over money
and I think a special member for him as
well
they're speaking with Keith Anderson of
the B+ choir is the director of that
choir
[Music]
breehn always likes to talk to the
participants in the service she knows
some of them of caramel William Barden
those come right the way around the
world to be here today and it's
important that they get their
recognition I think the smile let's not
forget you know the queen is one month
away from her 93rd birthday
here she is making sure she congratulate
some talks to everybody involved she's
really enjoyed today it's very clear
it's not a feigned interest even you can
see that in the expression though she's
grown up with this organization now the
Commonwealth is marking 70 years 67 of
those years she's been head of the
organization and without her I think
many all that in fact agree that it's
had some pretty rocky moments and
without the Queen it possibly wouldn't
even be the shape it's in today this is
a tribute not just to the organization
in its values it's a tribute to the head
of an organization that is indeed longer
than any other with the exception of the
United Nations what if you like is her
default mode when crisis erupts in the
Commonwealth its total to calm and unity
as so many other occasions when when
there were terrible rise in the 80s to
do with sanctions and the British
government was at odds with all the
other members the Queen didn't tell
people what to do what to think all she
did was appeal for calm and reason
yes she is coming through the west door
the flags are there the flag who've seen
coming through the vast numbers of the
press there and over the road will hear
a chair from the public as well
[Music]
[Applause]
and does the bells ring Majesty meets
Marie Claire Philippe Rafi Sega dancers
Robert Johnson our futures Commonwealth
Choir and Leonie Adams The Pianist
assemble
[Music]
[Applause]
and the queen leaves I think she'll
reflect that decision back in the 70s to
bring this service to Westminster Abbey
somewhere she's been coming ever since
was such an important one she really has
enjoyed today the emphasis as we've seen
once again on youth on young people this
is the longest-serving head the
Commonwealth I'm sure whatever have but
she knows young people are its future
[Music]
and now as Her Majesty prefers to depart
and we come to a close I turned to a New
Zealand poet Carla Mello and her poem
titled simply Commonwealth let us create
an atmosphere of kindness and love for
even the air we breathe fresh water
trees people ocean let us create a dream
house she wrote a great place to raise a
family for therein lies the face of an
extraordinary family of relatives what
we have in common is all of us
you